doc: add notes and questions for n31981 (#820)
bitcoin-core-review-club/website: _posts/2025-04-30-#31981.md

components: ["mining"]
host: ismaelsadeeq
status: upcoming
commit: e6e170cf6c67a56b9c14cece66fdc4fab5f3ec6b
---

## Notes

### Background

[StratumV2 (Sv2)](https://github.com/stratum-mining/sv2-spec/tree/main) protocol defines various roles, one of which is the Template Provider (TP), explained in the [template distribution](https://github.com/stratum-mining/sv2-spec/blob/main/07-Template-Distribution-Protocol.md) section of the spec. The TP pushes block template updates to miners whenever the chain tip is updated or when mempool fees have increased sufficiently.

> Rather than implementing the TP role in Bitcoin Core, the work done in [#31098](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/issues/31098) allows third-party processes to interface with bitcoind through interprocess communication (IPC). The IPC interface, also referred to as [multiprocess](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/issues/28722), is work-in-progress too.

Author: I think it is also referred to as IPC Interface quoting  https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/doc/design/multiprocess.md#component-overview-navigating-the-ipc-framework cc @stickies-v

> Rather than implementing the TP role in Bitcoin Core, the work done in [#31098](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/issues/31098) allows third-party processes to interface with bitcoind through interprocess communication (IPC). The IPC interface, also referred to as [multiprocess](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/issues/28722), is work-in-progress too.

Reviewer: I agree with Gloria, apologies for the error in my suggestion. `multiprocess` is separating `bitcoind` into multiple processes, which utilises the `IPC` interface. Suggested improvement:

```suggestion
Rather than implementing the TP role in Bitcoin Core, the work done in [#31098](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/issues/31098) allows third-party processes to interface with bitcoind through interprocess communication (IPC). The IPC interface, introduced as part of the [multiprocess](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/issues/28722) project, is work-in-progress too.
```

> Rather than implementing the TP role in Bitcoin Core, the work done in [#31098](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/issues/31098) allows third-party processes to interface with bitcoind through interprocess communication (IPC). The IPC interface, also referred to as [multiprocess](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/issues/28722), is work-in-progress too.

Reviewer: Fixed in [9e1f65a](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/website/pull/820/commits/9e1f65ad977e2ae9eb896d56f4258a6878123f3a)

- The method responsible for checking whether a block template is valid in Bitcoin core is [`TestBlockValidity`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/9efe5466885862bc1fb830524f7ce23e785fcac0/src/validation.h#L387).

### Motivation

- Using the IPC interface to check block validity is more performant than the `getblocktemplate` RPC, as it avoids serializing up to 4 MB of transaction data as JSON.

## Questions

1. Did you review the PR? [Concept ACK, approach ACK, tested ACK, or NACK](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#peer-review)? What was your review approach?

2. Is the new `checkBlock` method in the mining interface required by Sv2 TP client(yes/no)?

3. Can you list some checks performed on the block in `getblocktemplate` proposal mode? Does that include checking for a valid proof of work for the block template?

> 4. Apart from performance reasons mentioned in the PR title, are there any reasons an Sv2 TP client would want to use IPC instead of RPC?

Author: yes

5. What is the key difference between contextual and context-free checks in the block template validity checks?

> 6. Is there a change in behavior for `TestBlockValidity` after this PR, or is it pure refactor? If yes, what's the change?

Author: I had it before, grammarly said removed it.
how dare him correct a native  😃 
<img width="449" alt="Screenshot 2025-04-26 at 09 18 32" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/d36c5b29-a48b-4279-8fc7-cb561524dc2c" />

components: ["mining"]
host: ismaelsadeeq
status: upcoming
commit: e6e170cf6c67a56b9c14cece66fdc4fab5f3ec6b
---

## Notes

### Background

> [StratumV2 Sv2](https://github.com/stratum-mining/sv2-spec/tree/main) is a standard protocol that improves upon the StratumV1 protocol. 

Author: This is gone now.

Sv2 has several benefits, one of which is allowing individual miners connected to a mining pool to build their own block templates. This further decentralizes Bitcoin mining and improves the censorship resistance of Bitcoin transactions.

The Sv2 standard defines various roles, one of which is the Template Provider (TP), explained in the [template distribution](https://github.com/stratum-mining/sv2-spec/blob/main/07-Template-Distribution-Protocol.md) section of the spec. This role pushes block template updates to miners whenever the chain tip is updated or when mempool fees have increased sufficiently.

> In the Sv2 spec, it is specified that Bitcoin Core should fulfill the TP role, which means it has to implement the Sv2 spec in order to communicate with other roles.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the Sv2 spec, it is specified that Bitcoin Core should fulfill the TP role
```

I don't think that's correct?

Author: Yes, fixed.

Reviewer: Ugh sorry I messed up my comment, I was meant to quote "In the Sv2 spec, it is specified that Bitcoin Core should fulfill the TP role" instead of suggesting it as a fix. My issue was that per my understanding the Sv2 spec does _not_ mandate Bitcoin Core to fulfill the TP role? Anyone should be able to fulfill that role?

Author: Yes does not mandate that.
But recommended it, I will soften the tone.

Author: Fixed, thanks

Major objections were technical and conceptual, questioning whether the Sv2 Noise protocol encryption, messaging layer, and other specifications should be supported in Bitcoin Core, which would require a large code addition, review effort, and maintenance burden. Most of these concerns can be read in the deceased PR's comments.

Alongside this, there is an ongoing project [multi process Bitcoin](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/issues/28722) which introduced a new Inter-Process Communication (IPC) scheme, which allows the bitcoind process to communicate with other processes. Noting this, Bitcoin Core contributors suggested creating a mining IPC interface such that an external process, a TP client, would connect to it and receive push notifications of new block templates as specified in the spec. This template provider would then forward the block to the [Job Declarator](https://github.com/stratum-mining/sv2-spec/blob/main/06-Job-Declaration-Protocol.md).

> The mining interface has been implemented in Bitcoin Core with two classes `BlockTemplate` and `Mining`, which have several methods needed by the Sv2 TP client, effectively allowing projects like [Sjors TP client](https://github.com/Sjors/bitcoin/pull/49) to utilize it.

Author: I've rewritten this

The mining interface has been implemented in Bitcoin Core with two classes `BlockTemplate` and `Mining`, which have several methods needed by the Sv2 TP, effectively allowing projects like [Sjors TP](https://github.com/Sjors/bitcoin/pull/49) to utilize it.

> This approach has had some latency issues compared to when Bitcoin Core directly acts as the TP.

Reviewer: I'm not sure about this whole section. We've not covered Sv2 before, so some general context and background is nice, but the history of earlier proposals seems not super relevant to people who want to review this PR? I think Sjors does a good job explaining the rationale and background in his PR, so you could encourage the reader to have a look there, and then supplement what you've found missing as a reviewer?

> ### Motivation

Reviewer: The paragraph that follows is not really a motivation, so probably either the content or the header should be changed?

> ### Motivation

Reviewer: The paragraph that follows is not really a motivation, so probably either the content or the header should be changed?

Bitcoin Core PR [#31981](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/31981) adds a new method to the mining interface called `checkBlock` that checks whether a block template is valid or not. This check is equivalent to the one done in `getblocktemplate` RPC proposal mode. Using IPC is more performant, as it avoids serializing up to 4 MB of transaction data as JSON.

> - The method that performs this check is [`TestBlockValidity`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/9efe5466885862bc1fb830524f7ce23e785fcac0/src/rpc/mining.cpp#L724-L750)

Reviewer: This line is a bit confusing. It refers to a commit in master, so I think you're talking about the `getblocktemplate` check? But the paragraph seems to be more about what's new?

Author: This is a mixed-up.
I think it is fixed now

## Questions

1. Did you review the PR? [Concept ACK, approach ACK, tested ACK, or NACK](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#peer-review)? What was your review approach?

> 2. Is the new `CheckBlock` interface part of the TP (yes/no)?

Reviewer: I don't really understand this question. TP is a role, `checkBlock()` (lowercase `c`) is a function.

Author: I've rephrased the question.

3. Can you list some of the checks performed on the block in `getblocktemplate` proposal mode? Does that include checking for a valid proof of work for the block template?

> 4. Apart from performance reasons mentioned in the PR title, are there any reasons Sv2 would want to use IPC over RPC?

Reviewer: Sv2 is a protocol, and I don't think it specifies either. I think what you mean is a "Sv2 TP client"?

> 4. Apart from performance reasons mentioned in the PR title, are there any reasons Sv2 would want to use IPC over RPC?

Reviewer: Sv2 is a protocol, and I don't think it specifies either. I think what you mean is a "Sv2 TP client"?

Author: Fixed

5. What is the key difference between contextual and context-free checks in the block template validity checks?

6. Is there a change in behavior for `TestBlockValidity` after this PR, or is it a pure refactor? If yes, what's the change?

7. One of the reasons for locking `cs_main` in `TestBlockValidity` is to prevent `CheckBlock` race conditions. Can you describe a scenario when that might happen?

> 8. In [commit 1d029c23](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/blob/e6e170cf6c67a56b9c14cece66fdc4fab5f3ec6b/src/validation.cpp#L4662), why do we assert that `fchecked` should return false? Is this a potential issue?

Reviewer: nit: correct capitalization is important for variables, functions, classes, ...
```suggestion
8. In [commit 1d029c23](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/blob/e6e170cf6c67a56b9c14cece66fdc4fab5f3ec6b/src/validation.cpp#L4662), why do we assert that `fChecked` should return false? Is this a potential issue?
```

Author: Done
